Provide a draft specification using the Hindley-Milner algorithm. (#5)
henrikt-ma/ModelicaSpecification: RationaleMCP/0027/HindleyMilner.md

> # Unit checking

Reviewer: Add motivating paragraph:
```suggestion
# Unit checking

_motivation, motivation, motivation_

```

Unit checking is performed, after translation, by using a type inference algorithm, albeit adapted to work with units.
The algorithm proposed here is based on the Hindley-Milner algorithm.

> At a high level the algorithm collects a set of constraints on unit of expressions.

Reviewer: Grammar:
```suggestion
At a high level the algorithm collects a set of constraints on the units of expressions.
```

It extracts a sequence of substitutions from these constraints which once applied constructs the unit of a given expression.
Any inconsistencies discovered during this process is a unit error, and any unit expression that can't be evaluated is considered undefined.

> ## Unit of Modelica expressions

Reviewer: New section:
```suggestion
## The unit of a Modelica variable

blah

Note that the unit of a variable is not the same concept as the `unit`-attribute of the variable, but the unit will be equal to the `unit`-attribute when present.

## Units of Modelica expressions
```

The unit of an arbitrary Modelica expression is represented by a unit meta-expression.
This section outlines the different constructs it comprises.

### Variables

> The unit of variable `var`, is represented by identifier `var.unit`.

Reviewer: The:
```suggestion
The unit of the variable `var` is represented by the unit variable `var.unit`.
```

> In practice, these are the unit of the variable for which we are trying to infer units.

Reviewer: Plural:
```suggestion
In practice, these are the units of the variables for which we are trying to infer units.
```

# Unit checking
Unit checking is performed by using a type inference algorithm, albeit adapted to work with units. An example of such an algorithm is the Hindley-Milner algorithm.
At a high level the algorithm collects a set of constraints on unit of expressions. It extracts a sequence of substitutions from these constraints which once applied constructs the unit of a given expression.
Any inconsistencies discovered during this process, is a unit error, and any unit expression that can't be evaluated is considered undefined.

## Unit of expressions

The unit of an arbitrary Modelica expression is represented by a unit meta-expression.
This sections outlines the different constructs it comprises.

### Variables
The unit of variable `var`, is represented by identifier `var.unit`.

### Literals

> #### `Well-formed` unit

Reviewer: Here's a somewhat bigger discussion that I'm randomly attaching to this line.

It seems to me that we're missing a name for those units which are neither empty nor undefined, and I'm thinking that _well-formed unit_ could be a suitable name for that?

With such concepts, instead of saying that empty and undefined units are literals, couldn't one say that these belong to the alternatives for a _meta unit_, defined as being either of:
- empty unit
- undefined unit
- well-formed unit

One could then state (and later prove) that unit variables (constants aside) can only ever be assigned well-formed units during the process.

What is currently called a well-formed unit (literal) could then be a _concrete unit_ (which would be the only kind of literal now that the others are just alternatives for a _meta unit_), while _well-formed unit_ could be defined recursively as either of:
- concrete unit (avoiding the term _unit literal_ due to possible confusion with the unit expression string syntax)
- unit variable (unassigned or assigned to a well-formed unit)
- product of well-formed units
- well-formed unit raised to a rational power
- time derivative of well-formed unit

Finally, the goal would be to define the operators below as mappings from meta units to meta units.  If this succeeds, it will be clear that empty and undefined units are not lurking deep inside meta units.

Author: I am concerned that trying to ensure that empty and undefined units "are not lurking deep inside meta units" is a lost cause because, in world where being sloppy with a unit is a feature, what you are describing is a bug.

Reviewer: I think the lostness of the case is something we need to sort out, because I couldn't see how empty and undefined units would end up in meta unit expressions in the notebook implementation I made with Anne.  I think zoom might work better than writing more here…

Reviewer: This has now been discussed.  Resolving.

A `well-formed` unit can be uniquely represented by its base units factorization, offset and scaling, up to the order of the base units.

> #### `Empty` unit

Reviewer: Consistent spacing before headings for reviewer readability:
```suggestion

#### `Empty` unit
```

An expression with `empty` unit won't contribute to the unit of a parent expression, and will meet any constraints imposed on it.

> #### `Undefined` unit

Reviewer: Consistent spacing before headings for reviewer readability:
```suggestion

#### `Undefined` unit
```

An expression with `undefined` unit is used to represent unspecified cases, and will meet any constraints imposed on it.

### Operators

> #### div

Reviewer: Consistent spacing before headings for reviewer readability:
```suggestion

#### div
```

Consider the meta-expression `e1 div e2`.
* If both `e1` and `e2` are `well-formed`, it evaluates to a `well-formed` unit resulting from dividing `e1` by `e2`.
* If both `e1` and `e2` are `empty`, it evaluates to `empty`.
* If `e1` is `empty` and `e2` is well-formed, it evaluates to a `well-formed` unit resulting from dividing `"1"` by `e2`.
* If `e1` is `well-formed` and `e2` is `empty`, it evaluates to `e1`.
* If one of them is `undefined`, it evaluates to `undefined`.

> #### mul

Reviewer: Consistent spacing before headings for reviewer readability:
```suggestion

#### mul
```

Consider the meta-expression `e1 mul e2`.
* If both `e1` and `e2` are `well-formed`, it evaluates to a `well-formed` unit resulting from multiplying `e1` by `e2`.
* If both `e1` and `e2` are `empty`, it evaluates to `empty`.
* If one of them is `empty`, it evaluates to the other one.
* If one of them is `undefined`, it evaluates to `undefined`.

> #### pow

Reviewer: Consistent spacing before headings for reviewer readability:
```suggestion

#### pow
```

Consider the meta-expression `b pow e`.
* If `b` is `well-formed` and `e` is an Integer, it evaluates to a `well-formed` unit resulting from raising `b` to the power `e`.
* If `b` is `"1"`, it evaluates to `"1"`.
* If `b` is `empty`, it evaluates to `empty`.
* If `b` is `well-formed` and `e2` is a Real, it evaluates to `undefined`.
* If `b` is `undefined`, it evaluates to `undefined`.

#### der
Consider the meta-expression `der(e)`.
* If `e` is `well-formed`, it evaluates to `e div "s"`.
* If `e` is `empty`, it evaluates to `empty`.
* If `e` is `undefined`, it evaluates to `undefined`.

> _This definition prevent `der` from propagating `"s"` in a model that does not contain any units. It could lead
> to unwanted unit errors otherwise._

Reviewer: Review discussions will be easier with sentence-based line breaks:
```suggestion
_This definition prevents `der` from propagating `"s"` in a model that does not contain any units.
It could lead to unwanted unit errors otherwise._
```

## Unit compatibility
Two expressions with well-formed units are said to be unit compatible if the all of the following are true:

> 

Reviewer: Avoid potential paragraph break between list heading and items:
```suggestion
```

* Their base unit factorizations are equal.
* Their base unit offsets are equal.
* Their base unit scalings are equal.

> 

Reviewer: Drop excess empty line:
```suggestion
```

> _`"N"` and `"m/s2"` have different base unit factorizations, they are not
> compatible. `"K"` and `"degC"` have different base unit offsets, they are not
> compatible. `"s"` and `"ms"` have different base unit scaling, they are not
> compatible.	`"kN"` and `"W.s/mm"` are compatible. It is a quality of
> implementation, how equality of offsets and scalings are checked._

Reviewer: Separate examples from quality-of-implementation statement:
```suggestion
Examples:
- `"N"` and `"m/s2"` have different base unit factorizations, they are not compatible.
- `"K"` and `"degC"` have different base unit offsets, they are not compatible.
- `"s"` and `"ms"` have different base unit scaling, they are not compatible.
- `"kN"` and `"W.s/mm"` are compatible.

It is a quality of implementation how equality of offsets and scalings are checked.
```

The unit of `$value$` must be compatible with `$unit$`.

## Possible extensions and current limits

### Builtin operators and functions
The current state of this proposal does not cover the unit checking of the
different Modelica builtin operators and functions.

### Arrays
We don't try to specify how this would work an arrays, although the current
proposal work straight forwardly with element-wise operators. We are confident
that it could be extended to matrix computation too, but haven't a proof of
concept for that part.

### Constants
This proposal take a stance regarding how the unit of constants should be
handled but we recognise that this is still very much up for discussion. It is
also somewhat orthogonal to the rest of the proposal.

### Functions
The Hindler-Milner algorithm, provides a way to infer unit attributes of the
inputs and outputs of functions. Concretely, it would imply computing the
bundles of constraints from the body of each functions and adding them to the
algorithm, after a minimal rewriting, when processing a function call.

### Variable initialisation pattern
A common pattern used in the MSL, is the following:
```
model M

>     Real d(unit = "m") = 12;
>     Real s(unit = "m/s") = 0.1 / (3 * m);

Reviewer: Let's comply with the forthcoming MSL guideline on indentation:
```suggestion
  Real d(unit = "m") = 12;
  Real s(unit = "m/s") = 0.1 / (3 * m);
```

end M;
```
Where a modeler, knows how to express a variable with unit in function of another, with help of literal value that should really carry a unit.
The way to fix that with this proposal is to attach, a unit to the literal values with a call to `withUnit`.

### Syntax extension

> We could extend the modelica language to add syntactic sugar for calls to `withUnit`, passed suggestions include:

Reviewer: In case they wonder about whether it really works:
```suggestion
We could extend the Modelica language to add syntactic sugar for calls to `withUnit`.
T the following variants have all been successfully test implemented:
```

* `0.1[m]`

> * `0.1 'm'`

Reviewer: I think it looks less confusing without space in between:
```suggestion
* `0.1 'm'` (or as `0.1'm'` to show more clearly that the quoted unit belongs to the literal)
```

Reviewer: In what way was this resolved?

>   Real d(unit = "m") = 12;
>   Real s(unit = "m/s") = 0.1 / (3 * m);

Reviewer: To connect with the next section (`d` for _duration_):
```suggestion
  Real d(unit = "s") = 12;
  Real v(unit = "m/s") = 0.1 / (3 * d);
```

# Unit checking

> Unit checking is performed by using a type inference algorithm, albeit adapted to work with units. An example of such an algorithm is the Hindley-Milner algorithm.

Reviewer: Maybe you could make a stronger statement about the connection to Hindley-Milner?  Like saying that the algorithm proposed here has been inspired by Hindley-Milner?

> Unit checking is performed by using a type inference algorithm, albeit adapted to work with units. An example of such an algorithm is the Hindley-Milner algorithm.
> At a high level the algorithm collects a set of constraints on unit of expressions. It extracts a sequence of substitutions from these constraints which once applied constructs the unit of a given expression.
> Any inconsistencies discovered during this process, is a unit error, and any unit expression that can't be evaluated is considered undefined.

Reviewer: Sentence-based breaks for easier review process:
```suggestion
Unit checking is performed by using a type inference algorithm, albeit adapted to work with units.
An example of such an algorithm is the Hindley-Milner algorithm.
At a high level the algorithm collects a set of constraints on unit of expressions.
It extracts a sequence of substitutions from these constraints which once applied constructs the unit of a given expression.
Any inconsistencies discovered during this process is a unit error, and any unit expression that can't be evaluated is considered undefined.
```

#### `Empty` unit
An expression with `empty` unit won't contribute to the unit of a parent expression, and will meet any constraints imposed on it.

#### `Undefined` unit
An expression with `undefined` unit is used to represent unspecified cases, and will meet any constraints imposed on it.

### Operators

#### div
Consider the meta-expression `e1 div e2`.
* If both `e1` and `e2` are `well-formed`, it evaluates to a `well-formed` unit resulting from dividing `e1` by `e2`.
* If both `e1` and `e2` are `empty`, it evaluates to `empty`.
* If `e1` is `empty` and `e2` is well-formed, it evaluates to a `well-formed` unit resulting from dividing `"1"` by `e2`.
* If `e1` is `well-formed` and `e2` is `empty`, it evaluates to `e1`.
* If one of them is `undefined`, it evaluates to `undefined`.

#### mul
Consider the meta-expression `e1 mul e2`.
* If both `e1` and `e2` are `well-formed`, it evaluates to a `well-formed` unit resulting from multiplying `e1` by `e2`.
* If both `e1` and `e2` are `empty`, it evaluates to `empty`.
* If one of them is `empty`, it evaluates to the other one.
* If one of them is `undefined`, it evaluates to `undefined`.

#### pow
Consider the meta-expression `b pow e`.

> * If `b` is `well-formed` and `e` is an Integer, it evaluates to a `well-formed` unit resulting from raising `b` to the power `e`.

Reviewer: I think there's a mix of Modelica expression and meta-expression going on here.  In a meta-expression, I would have expected the exponent `e` to always be a rational number. Am I missing something?

Reviewer: Maybe one needs a separate section on the unit semantics of (a selection of) Modelica operators too?

Author: > I think there's a mix of Modelica expression and meta-expression going on here. In a meta-expression, I would have expected the exponent `e` to always be a rational number. Am I missing something?

If the wellformed unit is `"1"` we should still accept `Real` exponents.

Author: > Maybe one needs a separate section on the unit semantics of (a selection of) Modelica operators too?

At the very least, this is what I tried to do in the `Unit Inference` section.

Reviewer: Sorry, I forgot that there was also the later section!  I forgot about it just because I saw unexpected things here.  Wouldn't it make sense to move the case analysis to the later section, so that what is described here is only a meta-expression raised to a rational?

* If `b` is `"1"`, it evaluates to `"1"`.
* If `b` is `empty`, it evaluates to `empty`.
* If `b` is `well-formed` and `e2` is a Real, it evaluates to `undefined`.
* If `b` is `undefined`, it evaluates to `undefined`.

#### der
Consider the meta-expression `der(e)`.
* If `e` is `well-formed`, it evaluates to `e div "s"`.
* If `e` is `empty`, it evaluates to `empty`.
* If `e` is `undefined`, it evaluates to `undefined`.

_This definition prevents `der` from propagating `"s"` in a model that does not contain any units.
It could lead to unwanted unit errors otherwise._

> ## Unit compatibility

Reviewer: Maybe heading could make clear that compatibility is only defined for well-formed (concrete) units?
```suggestion
## Well-formed unit compatibility
```

Reviewer: Never mind. My bad.  Resolving.

> Two expressions with well-formed units are said to be unit compatible if the all of the following are true:

Reviewer: Can the _expressions_ part be dropped for a more direct statement?
```suggestion
Two well-formed units are said to be unit compatible if the all of the following are true:
```

* Their base unit factorizations are equal.
* Their base unit offsets are equal.
* Their base unit scalings are equal.

Examples:
- `"N"` and `"m/s2"` have different base unit factorizations, they are not compatible.
- `"K"` and `"degC"` have different base unit offsets, they are not compatible.
- `"s"` and `"ms"` have different base unit scaling, they are not compatible.
- `"kN"` and `"W.s/mm"` are compatible.

It is a quality of implementation how equality of offsets and scalings are checked.

> Empty units and undefined units are always compatible with each other,
> themselves and any well-formed units.

Reviewer: Line break:
```suggestion
Empty units and undefined units are always compatible with each other, themselves and any well-formed units.
```

## Unit inference

> The following rules are used to perform unit inference of any expressions.
> They describe the unit meta-expression of a given expression.  When it is
> specified that `"e1"` must be unit compatible with `"e2"`, we mean that the
> corresponding constraint should be added to the inference algorithm.

Reviewer: Line breaks:
```suggestion
The following rules are used to perform unit inference of any expressions.
They describe the unit meta-expression of a given expression.
When it is specified that `"e1"` must be unit compatible with `"e2"`, we mean that the corresponding constraint should be added to the inference algorithm.
```

> Note that any constraints of the form _`"u"` must be compatible with empty unit_,
>  or _`"u"` must be compatible with undefined unit_, should be discarded when running the inference algorithm.

Reviewer: Line breaks:
```suggestion
Note that any constraints of the form _`"u"` must be compatible with empty unit_, or _`"u"` must be compatible with undefined unit_, should be discarded when running the inference algorithm.
```

In this section, the unit meta-expression of expression `e` is called `e.unit`.

> Where possible we reuse the operator despite the fact that they operate on different
> expressions.

Reviewer: Line breaks:
```suggestion
Where possible we reuse the operator despite the fact that they operate on different expressions.
```

* The unit of the expression must be compatible with `e1.unit`.
* The unit of the expression must be compatible with `e2.unit`.

_The three constraints ensure unit propagation even when one of the operand units is `empty` or `undefined`_

#### Multiplicative operators
The unit of the expression is `e1.unit op e2.unit`.

#### Relational operators
The unit of `e1` and the unit of `e2` must be unit compatible.

#### Power operator
The unit of the expression is `e1.unit op e2`.

_If the `e2` is evaluable, and is necessary to evaluate the meta-expression, it should be evaluated._

### Function calls
* For each expression passed as argument, its unit must be compatible with the declared unit of the corresponding function input.
* If the unit of the output of the function is `well-formed`, the unit of the expression is the unit of the output of the function.
* The unit of the expression is `undefined` otherwise.

### Operator der
The unit of the expression `der(e)` is `der(e.unit)`.

### If expressions
Consider the expression `if cond then e1 else e2 end if;`
* If both branches are unit compatible, then the unit of the expression must be compatible with `e1.unit` and with `e2.unit` .

> * If both branches have `well-formed` but incompatible units, the condition must
>   be evaluable and the `if`-expression be replaced by one of the branches. (The
>   unit of the remaining branch will effectively become the unit of the entire
>   `if`-expression.)

Reviewer: Line breaks:
```suggestion
* If both branches have `well-formed` but incompatible units, the condition must be evaluable and the `if`-expression be replaced by one of the branches.
   (The unit of the remaining branch will effectively become the unit of the entire `if`-expression.)
```

* It is an error otherwise.

### Equations
Both sides of binding equations, equality equations and connect equations must be unit compatible.

## Unit operators

### `withUnit($value$, $unit$)`

Create an expression with unit `$unit$`, and value `$value$`.
Argument $value$ needs to be a `Real` expression, with empty unit.

_This operator makes it possible to attach a unit to a literal._

### `withoutUnit($value$, $unit$)`
Create an expression with empty unit, whose value is the numerical value of `$value$` expressed in `$unit$`.
Argument `$value$` needs to be a `Real` expression, with a well-formed unit.
The unit of `$value$` must be compatible with `$unit$`.

### `inUnit($value$, $unit$)`
Create an expression with unit `$unit$`, whose value is the conversion of `$value$` to `$unit$`.
Argument `$value$` needs to be a `Real` expression, with a well-formed unit.
The unit of `$value$` must be compatible with `$unit$`.

## Possible extensions and current limits

### Builtin operators and functions

> The current state of this proposal does not cover the unit checking of the
> different Modelica builtin operators and functions.

Reviewer: Line breaks:
```suggestion
The current state of this proposal does not cover the unit checking of the different Modelica builtin operators and functions.
```

### Arrays

> We don't try to specify how this would work an arrays, although the current
> proposal work straight forwardly with element-wise operators. We are confident
> that it could be extended to matrix computation too, but haven't a proof of
> concept for that part.

Reviewer: Line breaks:
```suggestion
We don't try to specify how this would work an arrays, although the current proposal work straight forwardly with element-wise operators.
We are confident that it could be extended to matrix computation too, but haven't a proof of concept for that part.
```

### Constants

> This proposal take a stance regarding how the unit of constants should be
> handled but we recognise that this is still very much up for discussion. It is
> also somewhat orthogonal to the rest of the proposal.

Reviewer: Line breaks:
```suggestion
This proposal takes a stance regarding how the unit of constants should be handled but we recognise that this is still very much up for discussion.
It is also somewhat orthogonal to the rest of the proposal.
```

### Functions

> The Hindler-Milner algorithm, provides a way to infer unit attributes of the
> inputs and outputs of functions. Concretely, it would imply computing the
> bundles of constraints from the body of each functions and adding them to the
> algorithm, after a minimal rewriting, when processing a function call.

Reviewer: Line breaks:
```suggestion
The Hindler-Milner algorithm, provides a way to infer unit attributes of the inputs and outputs of functions.
Concretely, it would imply computing the bundles of constraints from the body of each functions and adding them to the algorithm, after a minimal rewriting, when processing a function call.
```

### Variable initialisation pattern
A common pattern used in the MSL, is the following:
```
model M
  Real d(unit = "m") = 12;
  Real s(unit = "m/s") = 0.1 / (3 * m);
end M;
```
Where a modeler, knows how to express a variable with unit in function of another, with help of literal value that should really carry a unit.
The way to fix that with this proposal is to attach, a unit to the literal values with a call to `withUnit`.

### Syntax extension
We could extend the Modelica language to add syntactic sugar for calls to `withUnit`.
T the following variants have all been successfully test implemented:
* `0.1[m]`
* `0.1 'm'`
* `0.1."m"`

### unsafeUnit operator

> Another way to deal with the pattern described above would be to provide an unsafe operator
> that effectively drops any constraints generated in its subexpression. The whole expression would
> have `undefined` unit.

Reviewer: Line breaks:
```suggestion
Another way to deal with the pattern described above would be to provide an unsafe operator that effectively drops any constraints generated in its subexpression.
The whole expression would have `undefined` unit.
```

* Otherwise, `e.unit` is equal to `var.unit`.

If `var` has a declared unit attribute, `var.unit` must be compatible with it.

### Literals
Literals have `empty` unit.

### Binary operations
Consider an expression `e` of the form `e1 op e2`.

#### Additive operators
* `e1.unit` and `e2.unit` must be unit compatible.
* `e.unit` must be compatible with `e1.unit`.
* `e.unit` must be compatible with `e2.unit`.

The three constraints ensure unit propagation even when one of the operand units is `empty` or `undefined`

#### Multiplication
`e.unit` is equal to `e1.unit * e2.unit`.

#### Division
`e.unit` is equal to `e1.unit * (e2.unit ^ -1)`.

#### Relational operators
The unit of `e1` and the unit of `e2` must be unit compatible.

#### Power operator
* If `e2` is a constant or evaluated Integer, `e.unit` is equal to `e1.unit ^ e2`. (Note that unit-checking does not trigger evaluation.)
* Otherwise, `e1.unit` must be compatible with `"1"` and `e.unit` is equal to `"1"`.

(If the exponent was not evaluated or is a Real, the unit of the base should be `"1"`.)

(It is up for discussion, when `e2` is Real, whether `e2.unit` should be compatible with `"1"`.)

> ### Function calls

Reviewer: Maybe write in the style of rules below:
```suggestion
### Function calls
Consider the expression `e` in the form of a function call with arguments `e1`, `e2`, …, `en`.
```

* For each expression passed as argument, its unit must be compatible with the declared unit of the corresponding function input.
* If the output of the function has a declared unit, the unit of the expression is the declared unit.

> * The unit of the expression is `undefined` otherwise.

Reviewer: Rule for propagation of empty unit:
```suggestion
* If the output as well as all the inputs of the function have declared unit `""` (explicitly or implicitly), and all expressions passed as argument have `empty` unit, the unit of the expression is `empty`.
* The unit of the expression is `undefined` otherwise.
```

Author: We don't have that rule in our implementation.

Reviewer: OK, but don't you agree that it would be a reasonable rule? (I'm modifying the suggestion to also require the inputs to have empty unit.)

Author: It seems reasonable but could nonetheless lead to errors if untested.

> 

Reviewer: How about having a special section about the transcendental functions, with just an example of how to handle one of them?

This could be a starting point:
```suggestion
### Transcendental functions
As examples of transcendental functions, consider `sin`, `sign`, and `atan2`.
Other transcendental functions can be handled similarly.

For an expression `e` in the form `sin(e1)`:
* If `e1.unit` is `empty`, then so is `e.unit`.
* If `e1.unit` is not `empty`, then it must be compatible with `"1"` and `e.unit` is `"1"`.

Note that these constraints can only be processed once `e1.unit` has been determined.

Implementation note: The rule above can be implemented as making `e.unit` equal to `e1.unit`, and if `e1.unit` is well-formed after completed unit inference, then verify that it compatible with `"1"`.

For an expression `e` in the form `sign(e1)`:
* If `e1.unit` is `empty`, then so is `e.unit`.
* If `e1.unit` is not `empty`, then `e.unit` is `"1"`.

For an expression `e` in the form `atan2(e1, e2)`:
* If `e1.unit` must be compatible with `e2.unit`.
* If `e1.unit` and `e2.unit` are `empty`, then so is `e.unit`.
* If not `e1.unit` and `e2.unit` are `empty`, then `e.unit` is `"1"`.

```

Author: The reason why I didn't talk about transcendental functions is that they need this softer notion of constraints.

Reviewer: I'd say it is because of this, combined with that they often come up in the unit checking discussions, that they need to be handled by the proposal from start.  By doing so, we also avoid giving the impression that this is something we haven't thought about, and that later introduction of these "softer" constraints will look like a late-minute quick fix.

### Operator der
The unit of the expression `der(e)` is `der(e.unit)`.

### If expressions

> Consider the expression `e` of the form `if cond then e1 else e2 end if;`

Reviewer: That looks more like an `if`-equation.  Expression:
```suggestion
Consider the expression `e` of the form `if cond then e1 else e2`:
```

> * `e1.unit` and `e2.unit` must be unit compatible.

Reviewer: I think this rule deserves a rationale after the list of rules, because it looks a bit redundant in view of the other two… assuming it actually isn't redundant?!

* `e.unit` must be compatible with `e1.unit`.
* `e.unit` must be compatible with `e2.unit`.

(The presence of an `if`-expression during unit-checking means its condition was not evaluated.)

### Equations
Both sides of binding equations, equality equations and connect equations must be unit compatible.

## Unit operators

### `withUnit($value$, $unit$)`

Create an expression with unit `$unit$`, and value `$value$`.

> Argument $value$ needs to be a `Real` expression, with empty unit.

Reviewer: I suppose you want some formatting?
```suggestion
Argument $value$ needs to be a `Real` expression, with `empty` unit.
```

This operator makes it possible to attach a unit to a literal.

### `withoutUnit($value$, $unit$)`
Create an expression with empty unit, whose value is the numerical value of `$value$` expressed in `$unit$`.
Argument `$value$` needs to be a `Real` expression, with a well-formed unit.

> The unit of `$value$` must be compatible with `$unit$`.

Reviewer: Same comment as for `inUnit` below.

### `inUnit($value$, $unit$)`
Create an expression with unit `$unit$`, whose value is the conversion of `$value$` to `$unit$`.
Argument `$value$` needs to be a `Real` expression, with a well-formed unit.

> The unit of `$value$` must be compatible with `$unit$`.

Reviewer: No, not with the current definition of _compatible_.  Maybe the best way to fix this is to say _equivalent_ instead of _compatible_ for the unit constraints, and define `compatible` as just having the same base unit factors?

Author: I am adding a notion of convertibility.

We are confident that it could be extended to matrix computation too, but haven't a proof of concept for that part.

### Constants
This proposal takes a stance regarding how the unit of constants should be handled but we recognise that this is still very much up for discussion.
It is also somewhat orthogonal to the rest of the proposal.

### Functions
The Hindler-Milner algorithm, provides a way to infer unit attributes of the inputs and outputs of functions.
Concretely, it would imply computing the bundles of constraints from the body of each functions and adding them to the algorithm, after a minimal rewriting, when processing a function call.

### Variable initialisation pattern
A common pattern used in the MSL, is the following:
```
model M
  Real d(unit = "s") = 12;
  Real v(unit = "m/s") = 0.1 / (3 * d);
end M;
```
Where a modeler knows how to express a variable with unit in function of another, with help of literal values that should really carry a unit.
The way to fix that with this proposal is to attach, a unit to the literal values with a call to `withUnit`.

### Syntax extension
We could extend the Modelica language to add syntactic sugar for calls to `withUnit`.

> T the following variants have all been successfully test implemented:

Reviewer: Typo?
```suggestion
The following variants have all been successfully test implemented:
```

# Unit checking

Unit checking is the process of inferring the units of Modelica variables, and ensuring the variables are used consistently in expressions and equations.

It takes place after any evaluation of evaluable parameters and no evaluable parameters shall be evaluated during this process.

It is performed by using a type inference algorithm, albeit adapted to work with units.
The algorithm proposed here is based on the Hindley-Milner algorithm.
At a high level the algorithm collects a set of constraints on the units of expressions.

> It extracts a sequence of substitutions from these constraints which once applied constructs the unit of a given expression.

Reviewer: To me, this looks like an informal overview of the process.  Shouldn't it be described in some more detail in the _Unit inference section_?  Alternatively, the _Unit inference_ could be renamed _Unit constraints_, and then we could have a new _Unit inference_ section afterwards where the processing of the constraints is described.  This would be beneficial for the structure in case we need to expand on this topic be, for example, explaining in more detail when a constraint is ready to be processed, or the general inability to process constraints one at a time without the need for substitutions involving other unit variables.

# Unit checking

Unit checking is the process of inferring the units of Modelica variables, and ensuring the variables are used consistently in expressions and equations.

It takes place after any evaluation of evaluable parameters and no evaluable parameters shall be evaluated during this process.
(This must be true as long as tools allow the users to opt-out from unit-checking.)

It is performed by using a type inference algorithm, albeit adapted to work with units.
The algorithm proposed here is based on the Hindley-Milner algorithm.
At a high level the algorithm collects a set of constraints on the units of expressions.

> It extracts a sequence of substitutions from these constraints which once applied constructs the unit of a given expression.

Reviewer: Here's an example with mutually dependent unit variables:
```
model MutuallyDependenUnits
  parameter Real k1(unit = "m") = 1;
  parameter Real k2(unit = "s") = 1;
  Real x;
  Real y;
equation
  x^2 * y^3 = k1;
  x^3 * y^2 = k2;
end MutuallyDependenUnits;
```
This is solved by:
```
x.unit = "s(3/5).m-(2/5)"
y.unit = "m(3/5).s-(2/5)"
```

After your explanation of what the kernel implementation should be doing, I would have expected it to find the solution, but for some reason it doesn't.

Anyway, I think I now see in what way the "application of the sequence to any unit expression" could be understood as just a less efficient way of the idea I'm trying to convey here.  I mean, isn't a dictionary of solutions (possibly _unknown_) for all unit variables the most efficient structure for determining the unit of an arbitrary expression, and at the same time the structure of primary interest to us for getting the inferred units of Modelica variables?  With this in mind, I would only apply "the sequence" to the substitutions themselves (in addition to the constraints remaining to be processed).

When a constraint is processed and a substitution obtained, the substitution will have no impact on later obtained substitutions, since the eliminated variable will have been removed from the corresponding constraints.  Hence, if a new substitution is applied immediately to previously obtained substitutions as well as remaining constraints, the total number of places where a substitution is applied cannot increase but only decrease each time a satisfied constraint without unit variables is removed.  Thus, there also seems to be a performance gain in immediate application of constraints instead of keeping track of a sequence.

Applied to `MutuallyDependenUnits`, one would start with the constraints:
```
k1.unit ~ "m"
k2.unti ~ "s"
x.unit^2 * y.unit^3 ~ k1.unit
x.unit^3 * y.unit^2 ~ k2.unit
```
After processing the first two constraints we're in the state:
```
k1.unit -> "m"
k2.unti -> "s"
x.unit^2 * y.unit^3 ~ "m"
x.unit^3 * y.unit^2 ~ "s"
```
Here, the approach in the notebook would solve simultaneously for `x.unit` and `y.unit`, but let's do it sequentially instead.  Solve `x.unit^2 * y.unit^3 ~ "m"` with respect to `x.unit` first:
```
k1.unit -> "m"
k2.unti -> "s"
x.unit -> "m"^(1/2) * y.unit^-(3/2)
"m(3/2)" * y.unit^-(5/2) ~ "s"
```
Finally, solving for `y.unit`, we get (after applying the substitution to the previously obtained constraint):
```
k1.unit -> "m"
k2.unti -> "s"
x.unit -> "s(3/5).m-(2/5)"
y.unit -> "s-(2/5).m(3/5)"
```

Do you agree that the algorithm should be capable (and allowed) to conclude this?

Author: Yes, I fully agree, this is how it is implemented and I consider it a bug that it isn't working.

Author: The bug should be fixed in our implementation.

# Unit checking

Unit checking is the process of inferring the units of Modelica variables, and ensuring the variables are used consistently in expressions and equations.

It takes place after any evaluation of evaluable parameters and no evaluable parameters shall be evaluated during this process.
(This must be true as long as tools allow the users to opt-out from unit-checking.)

It is performed by using a type inference algorithm, albeit adapted to work with units.
The algorithm proposed here is based on the Hindley-Milner algorithm.
At a high level the algorithm collects a set of constraints on the units of expressions.

> It extracts a sequence of substitutions from these constraints which once applied constructs the unit of a given expression.

Reviewer: I don't understand what _a given expression_ is supposed to mean here.  I even wonder if it should be highlighted at all that we can use the sequence to find units of expressions, at least not until we get to things like `inUnit`.

Maybe this would be more to the point, at least for now?
```suggestion
The constraints are solved by iteratively eliminating the unknowns of the problem using substitutions derived from the constraints.
```

Author: Not all unknowns are eliminated though.

Author: I am trying to describe how one goes from the sequence of substitution to the unit of a variable, by highlighting that applying the sequence of substitution to an arbitrary unit meta-expression, will produce a well-formed unit, if it can be inferred.

> Any inconsistencies discovered during this process is a unit error, and any unit expression that can't be evaluated is considered undefined.

Reviewer: 1. Singular/plural
2. Trying to be more precise than _can't be evaluated_
```suggestion
Any inconsistency discovered during this process is a unit error, and any unit expression that contains remaining unknowns at the end of the process is considered undefined.
```

Author: https://www.masterclass.com/articles/any-singular-or-plural
The plural is fine here.

- `"kN"` and `"W.s/mm"` are compatible.

It is a quality of implementation how equality of offsets and scalings are checked.

`empty` units and `undefined` units are always compatible with each other, themselves and any `well-formed` units.

## Unit convertibility
A well-formed unit `u1` is said to be convertible to another well-formed unit `u2` if:
* Their base unit factorizations are equal.

Examples:
- `"N"` is not convertible to `"m/s2"`, since they have different base unit factorizations.
- `"K"` is convertible to `"degC"`, since they differ by base unit offsets.
- `"s"` is convertible to `"ms"`, since they differ by base unit scaling.
- `"kN"` is convertible to `"W.s/mm"`.

`empty` units and `undefined` units are never convertible to each other, themselves or any `well-formed` units.

## Unit inference

### Modified Hindley-Milner

The original Hindley-Milner algorithm is designed to infer types, and consists of building a sequence of substitutions that returns the type of any expression of a given program.
Applying this algorithm to perform unit inference in Modelica comes with two important differences:

>   * Not all variables must have a unit in a given model

Reviewer: Make all items complete sentences:
```suggestion
  * Not all variables must have a unit in a given model.
```

Reviewer: What does the _in a given model_ add here?

If the emphasis is on _variables in a model_ (as opposed to unit variables), maybe this could work?
```suggestion
  * Not all Modelica variables must have a unit.
```

  * There are operation on units, that is, not all constraints are of the form  _`var1.unit` is compatible with `var2.unit`_.

> The following describes a modified version of the Hindley-Milner's algorithm to perform unit inference in the Modelica language.

Reviewer: Is it with or without the possessive _s_ in the algorithm name?  It's without on line 104.

Reviewer: Maybe this sentence would work better right after the sentence _The original Hindley-Milner algorithm_?

> The following describes a modified version of the Hindley-Milner's algorithm to perform unit inference in the Modelica language.
> 

Reviewer: This would make a better heading for the item list:
```suggestion
Hindley-Milner's algorithm modified to perform unit inference in the Modelica language:
```

Due to a Github issue I can't express that I also want to remove line 110.

> * Traverse the model and collect constraints before any evaluations has occured.

Reviewer: Is there more precise term than _model_ we can use to express when in the translation process the constraints should be extracted?

Author: I don't understand what you mean here, `model` is not meant to describe time related reference.

> * After evaluable parameters have been evaluated, evaluate both sides of the constraints. (This turns constant Integer expressions into literals, evaluates certain `if-condition`s and propagates `empty` and `undefined` units to the top of the constraints.)

Reviewer: Misc:
```suggestion
* After evaluable parameters have been evaluated, evaluate both sides of the constraints. (This turns exponent expressions into numbers, evaluates certain `if-condition`s, and propagates `empty` and `undefined` units to the top of the constraints.)
```

I'm not sure I fully understand the need for evaluating the `Integer` expressions here, as the unit meta-expression power operator assumes that the exponent is a rational.  I guess there's something subtle going on here, where the power expressions are first constructed tentatively, and later discarded if the exponent isn't evaluated?

Author: Certain constraints, are dependent on certain expressions having been evaluated, this is the case for constraints resulting from `if` and `^`.

* Discard any constraints of the form _`u` must be compatible with empty unit_, or _`u` must be compatible with undefined unit_, as they are trivially satisfied.
* For all constraints:
    * If the constaint is of the form _`well-formed` unit `u1` must be compatible with `well-formed` unit `u2`_, check that this is the case, it is an error otherwise.
    * Otherwise:

>         * Rewrite the constraint to be of the form `var.unit` is compatible with `u` where `u` is a unit meta-expression that doesn't contain references to the unit variable `var.unit`, if it is not possible, discard the constraint.

Reviewer: Aren't we supposed to allow solving for the unit of `x` here?
```
  Real v(unit = "m/s") = 5;
  Real x;
equation
  der(x) = v;
```

Author: We do multiply by second to invert `der`, in our implementation.

>         * Append the substitution _`var.unit` => `u`_ to the sequence of substitutions and apply it to all remaining constraints.

Reviewer: I have the impression that this wouldn't work for mutually dependent variables.

However, I think that a small modification would make it work, and the key is to also perform "back-substitutions":
- Apply the substitution immediately to all remaining constraints as well as all solutions obtained so far.
- If a previously obtained solution gets updated by the substitution, convert it back to a constraint and add it to the constraint work set.
- At the end of this process, a variable `var` has a well-formed unit if and only if the substitution for `unit.var` goes to a well-formed unit.

Author: Let's talk about that.

> * For every variable `var` without a unit-attribute, apply the sequence of substitutions to `var.unit`.

Reviewer: Formatting:
```suggestion
* For every variable `var` without a `unit`-attribute, apply the sequence of substitutions to `var.unit`.
```

Reviewer: Maybe the optimization to exclude variables with `unit`-attribute can be mentioned non-normatively?
```suggestion
* For every variable `var`, apply the sequence of substitutions to `var.unit`.  (Given that no unit errors have been detected, a variable with a `unit`-attribute will get the given unit.)
```

    * If it results in a `well-formed` unit, then this is the unit of `var`.

>     * The unit of `var` is left unknown, otherwise

Reviewer: Complete sentence (no need for _left_, as it is now that all variables get their unit, as far as I understand):
```suggestion
    * Otherwise, the unit of `var` is unknown.
```

> 

Reviewer: Accidental newline:
```suggestion
```

> The following rules describe the unit meta-expression of a given expression, where it makes sense.

Reviewer: Worth emphasizing which kind of expression:
```suggestion
The following rules describe the unit meta-expression of a given Modelica expression, where it makes sense.
```

They also provide the constraints that arise from different Modelica constructs.

When it is specified that _`e1` must be unit compatible with `e2`_, the corresponding constraint should be collected.

In this section, the unit meta-expression of expression `e` is called `e.unit`.

### Variables
Consider the expression `e` of the form `var`, where `var` is a Modelica variable.
* If `var` doesn't have a declared unit attribute, and has constant component variablity, `e.unit` is equal to `empty` unit.
* Otherwise, `e.unit` is equal to `var.unit`.

> If `var` has a declared unit attribute, `var.unit` must be compatible with it.

Reviewer: Just a GitHub reminder about _equivalent_:
```suggestion
If `var` has a declared unit attribute, `var.unit` must be equivalent to it.
```

### Literals
Literals have `empty` unit.

### Binary operations
Consider an expression `e` of the form `e1 op e2`.

#### Additive operators
* `e.unit` must be compatible with `e1.unit`.
* `e.unit` must be compatible with `e2.unit`.

Note that this requires introducing a temporary variable to represent `e.unit`.
This allows unit propagation when one of the operand has `empty` unit.

#### Multiplication
`e.unit` is equal to `e1.unit * e2.unit`.

#### Division
`e.unit` is equal to `e1.unit * (e2.unit ^ -1)`.

#### Relational operators
The unit of `e1` and the unit of `e2` must be unit compatible.

#### Power operator

> * If `e2` is a constant or evaluated Integer, `e.unit` is equal to `e1.unit ^ e2`. (Note that unit-checking does not trigger evaluation.)

Reviewer: Formatting:
```suggestion
* If `e2` is a constant or evaluated `Integer`, `e.unit` is equal to `e1.unit ^ e2`. (Note that unit-checking does not trigger evaluation.)
```
